Abstract
Heart disease is a major health burden and the primary cause of death worldwide over the past few decades. Heart diseases also known as cardiovascular diseases encompass a wide range of conditions that affect the heart. These vary from blood vessel diseases, heart rhythm problems to heart defects that one is born with. Coronary Heart Disease (CHD) is the major type of cardiovascular disease which leads to the majority of death all around the world. Also, healthcare expenditures are overwhelming national and corporate spending plans due to asymptomatic diseases including cardiovascular diseases. Therefore, there is an urgent need for early detection and treatment of such diseases to reduce the death rates as well as the health expenditure. The field of medical analysis is often referred to be a valuable source of rich information. The information which is gathered by healthcare studies and data analysis of hospitals are utilizing for analyzing purposes to obtain an accurate and reliable approach to achieving an early diagnosis of the disease. Data Science plays an important in processing large amounts of data in the field of medical sciences. The challenge lies in the complexity of the data and correlations when it comes to prediction using conventional techniques. Therefore the researchers utilize several data mining and machine learning (ML) techniques to analyze large sets of data and aid in the right prediction of heart diseases. This study aims to identify the various factors that mainly contribute to determine the risk of coronary heart disease and to predict the risk of a coronary heart disease occurrence using identified crucial factors which are related to coronary heart disease. The scope of this research is limited to using two supervised learning techniques namely logistic regression and the KNearest Neighbour algorithm to discover correlations in CHD data that might help to improve the prediction rate and to carry out a comparative study. Using the Framingham Heart Disease dataset of 4238 initial instances, intelligent models are derived by the considered ML techniques. Further, data analysis is carried out in Python using JupyterLab to validate the accuracy of algorithms. The exploratory data analysis emphasized some observable associations and patterns between the response variable, TenYearCHD, and features such as sysBP, glucose, age, cigsPersDay, totChol, prevalentHyp, male, BPMeds, and diabetes. The features like glucose, age, sysBP, diaBP, cigsPerDay, and totChol have shown positive associations with the response. Also, the data visualizations have identified that conditions like the prevalence of diabetes, prevalence of hypertension, and taking blood pressure medications are associated with the response in a positive manner. Also, total cholesterol and age have implied a positive association between them. There are some major findings on joint effects on the response, ‘Ten-year risk of CHD’ are identified as well. The joint effect of prevalence of hypertension and higher heart rates, the joint effect of higher age and higher systolic blood pressure and, the joint effect of higher blood pressure levels and smoking habit have shown a higher tendency of getting a heart disease. According to the advanced analysis results, both the logistic regression model and the K-Nearest Neighbour algorithm are somewhat more sensitive than specific. It is found that the K-Nearest Neighbour algorithm provides the best accuracy of 91.89% in comparison to the logistic regression model. Empirical results using different performance evaluation measures report that the K-Nearest Neighbour algorithm is promising in detecting CHD.

